A welcome back the next few videos are about CXXVI which is a popular data format.
It stands for comma separated values.
It's just a way of taking data usually tabular data and just sticking it in a file and storing it so
that we can then do something with it later.
A lot of the data sets that you might work with whether in Python or another language are probably are
often CXXVI datasets.
So things like crime records.
I'm going to show you one of those in just a moment from county governments or state governments things
like environmental data credit card transactions from your bank you can often download in cxxviii files.
So it's a common format that we can work with.
So we're going to talk about how we do that in Python.
First let's just talk about CSB itself.
Like I said the common file format for tabular data.
So CSP does not really suit all sorts of data that needs to be homogenous data that follows a pattern.
So let me show you an example file.
Here is a really simple CSP file called fighters CXVII.
It contains information about fighters from the streetfighter games and the first row in any CSP file
contains the headers.
The headers basically set up what the data is.
So you can see first of all we've got a bunch of commas separating values but the first row has a name
comma so that tells us all right.
The first thing before every comma on each row is a name.
So Ken or Blanca then the next thing is country Japan or USA.
And then lastly we have height and centimeters like 165 or 2:14.
So a very simple data set.
But take a look at something like this.
This is from the Sacramento.
I don't know if it's the state or the county of Sacramento or the city of Sacramento but some government
in Sacramento.
This is their crime records for the year 2006.
I downloaded it off their Web site and we can see basically it contains a ton of crime records and it's
I don't know how many thousands of lines it would take me forever to scroll.
OK.
Yeah.
Almost 8000 mind each line contains things.
Here are the headers up top.
Like the crime date time the address that beat the District Crime description so you can actually see
on basically New Year's Eve as soon as it hit midnight there is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7.
Wow.
Geez I didn't actually take the time to go through this.
That was a lot of crimes on midnight on New Year's Eve.
Oh OK.
Well we can see things like the time but we can also see you know what is there fictitious trying to
pass a fictitious check or burglary of a vehicle.
So you could do things with these datasets of course.
That's kind of the point of making them public.
And the first step of doing anything with the data set in Python is importing it in.
So this video was going to focus on reading files like this in and we can just read a CACP file like
any other file except it's not really a good idea.
There's actually a built in CAC module that helps us read C S V files in particular a lot easier.
But you could do something like this with open fighters step C S V as file.
Anything that we've done already.
If I had over three I just paste that in.
I have the fighters that every file in the same directory.
If you see what we get here it gives just one giant string.
So it's up to us to actually parse it.
And what would we want it to look like.
Do we want each row to be a list and then put the entire thing in a giant list.
We want dictionaries.
So it's actually a good exercise to go through and try and parse this what would you do.
You would probably hear what I would do.
I would split on the newline characters.
Each one of those gives us a list of give us a list of a bunch of rows and then within each row we split
on the common characters and that would get us most of the way there.
But anyway we don't have to worry about that because we can use the built in cxxviii module which will
handle this and parse it all for us assuming our data conforms to the CSP standards.
So you don't don't do it that way.
What you want to use instead is the CSP module.
And there's actually two different ways of reading in CXXVI and the first thing I'll show you is called
reader.
So when you use the conventional reader it will basically give you each row as a list.
So that allows you to iterate over rows of the C S V.
Each row is a separate list.
Then there's dict reader and it's kind of like Reader reads in the data except instead of each row being
a list the rows are what's known as ordered dicts. Dict with a T there.
I don't know if that's very clear.
We'll go into detail into what that actually is.
And once we get there just a bit but it's just different in that almost.
Think of it as a dictionary with order so that it remembers what order things were in.
Unlike a regular dictionary.
So two different ways.
I want to show you both.
Let's start by focusing on the reader example.
So I'm just going to copy this actually and I have a file I've already made called Read P Y and I have
this example which I said was the bad way of doing it just the traditional file got read.
Now I'm going to paste in using reader.
OK so if we look at what we have to do we have to import and see a C module and just import the part
we need which is Reader this part's all the same.
Open the file with open as file then this is the part where we actually call reader and we pass in the
file that we've opened and what it gives back to us.
If we look at it.
If I just print CXXVI reader and we look at what it gives us back it's quite out of here and run Python
read.
It's this C S V reader object when we iterate over the object.
However it gives us a nice iterator and each row in the CSP file is represented as a list.
So if I print each row now by iterating over every reader save the file.
But if we get there we go one row one must it's important to note the first row of the headers is still
included.
So it doesn't actually you know parse the headers or do anything with them.
It just puts them as the first row just like any other roads it splits on the commas and then puts them
all in a row so we can work with this data in this form.
For example let's say I wanted to print out something really simple like you know Ken is from USA so
fighter name is from fighter country.
So we could do instead of row we could say for fighter and CSC reader and then the thing when you're
working with a traditional reader is that you have to you have to access data based off of an index.
So the name is going to be index 0 in country is index 1 that is a bit of a downside is that you have
to use numbers like this fighter zero instead of being able to say fighter name fighters zero is from
fighter 1 like that.
And if we run that we don't need to print the row and we execute it.
This is what we get looks looks good except we still get this name ESROM country.
We don't want that most likely you don't want those headers.
So just a quick note what this actually is here CAC reader it's an iterator just like in the generator
section.
And we talked about it.
You go over an iterator once you kind of exhaust it.
So if I went over it once here if I tried to do another like if I just did the exact same thing again
here for fighter and CSFB reader we can do the exact same thing.
If I try and do that we actually only get one copy because we've exhausted the iterator we're at the
end.
There are no there is no data in the iterator to keep moving forward on it can't call next anymore.
But we can take advantage of that if we don't want the headers.
You can just call not vext next CSFB reader that moves us forward once and then it starts from the row
after the headers.
So if I save and now I run this we don't get the headers at the beginning.
But if you did want the headers and you wanted to work with data and you don't want to just print it
out or you go through at one time you could turn it into a list very easily.
So let me just duplicate this.
Keep that example.
You could easily just do let's do list see every reader let's call it data equals list see every reader.
And now we could print data and now it's in a list that you could work with.
It really depends on what you want to do with the data.
And here we go.
So we have a list of lists.
So just remember this does not give you a list by default.
It's an iterator so we can iterate over it.
We can loop over it and do something with the data.
But if you want to have access to the data after that you want to save it stored all in memory at once.
Then you can turn it into a list.
So just depends on what you want to do.
But this video is really more about showing you the two ways of importing and reading the data.
So that's one using reader.
The next I'll show you is using dict reader so it is going to copy this code over.
Remember the difference aside from the syntax of importing dict reader and calling dict reader instead
of reader everything else looks the same.
The difference is in how each row is represented here a row was a list over here a row is an ordered
dict and ordered dict is a dictionary that has an order to it.
So it's a special collection in Python.
Let me just show you what it looks like.
Copy this.
Paste it in here.
Everything's the same except for importing dict reader from.
And we can just print each row now.
It returns with an iterator again.
Let me clear so we can make space.
If we run it again here's what we get.
Each row is an ordered dict object.
And like I said it's just like a dictionary.
Or you can access data using a key and the magical part is that the keys are set up automatically to
be the headers.
So we could use name and get canned.
We could use country and get India.
So let me show you that here.
Let's go back and this is an iterator again so we can only go over it once.
And thus we cast it to a list or some other format in memory and actually have it all in memory at once.
But for now let's just instead of printing row let's just print row name.
I think it was capitalized was it.
Yes.
Capital and name if I do this.
There we go.
So we don't have to worry about the headers being the first row anymore because each row has the headers
interspersed as the keys and we can tell it's an ordered dictate because name is always coming first
before country before height they're in the same order.
OK.
So again both examples here using a reader.
This is going to give you an iterator and each row is going to be a list.
This dict reader gives you an iterator and when we iterate over it or through it each row is an ordered
dict which is a special Python collection.
We haven't really seen before but you can treat it as just a dictionary.
You access data using keys.
There's one other thing I forgot to mention which is we can actually use USV files that aren't technically
separated by commas as long as they're separated by the same character that character is known as the
delimiter and it's supposed to be a comma.
But you may have a file that's delimited using a pipe like this.
And if that's the case all you have to do is specify using a keyword argument just like this.
So if I copy it over here.
I actually already have fighters to CSP that I've made and if I just select all of these and replace
it with a pipe instead or anything as a star character and you do want to be careful because if you
use something like you know a number that exists then you're going to run into problems.
If your number exists anywhere else in your data you want to use something that is unique.
But if I do this now then I have this other file delimiter.
We can either do as a reader or as a direct reader it doesn't matter.
But if I just print the rows now.
Oh and I make sure I change this to the right file name fighters to CSB.
This file here.
Run it now.
There we go.
Successfully parses all the data.
And you know just to show you we could do a dollar sign if we wanted to.
Not exactly the best idea but if we replaced all of these with a dollar sign instead in front of the
code it still works OK.
So that's that you can work with 0 delimiters if you have to.